So screen readers,
they're a huge part of accessibility.
Super cool that we have screen
readers on our devices.
So screen readers are a type of
assistive technology, or AT,
which I'll abbreviate here and there.
In the world of accessibility,
AT is just mentioned so
much that you should know that
that's what that stands for.
Screen readers allow people to both
use websites and web applications and
contribute to websites and
web applications.
There are blind developers.
There's different ways that we can
use software to consume software and
to create software.
So the whole thing needs to
be accessible as possible.
And for many people with disabilities,
screen readers are essential for
navigating the day-to-day.
Mobile devices are amazing these days, and
especially the iPhone has a really
good screen reader built in.
Using maps, or checking your calendar,
checking your email,
chatting with a friend, taking pictures,
blind people will take pictures.
[LAUGH] There's all of these
things that we use our devices for
you can do with a screen reader,
especially on the iPhone.
But Android devices do have
a screen reader as well.
And it's not limited to blind people,
either.
Screen reading technology,
which uses speech-to-text, or
text-to-speech, yeah, text-to-speech,
I think I wrote that backwards,
can announce what is on the screen.
And that can be useful for people who
maybe have cognitive impairments or
you just need more help,
I've even used a browser extension called,
I think it's called Read Aloud.
If I'm just feeling really distracted and
I have to read a legal document or
something, I will totally
use a screen reader so
that I just can't stop reading it,
it'll read it to me.
And I can see the screen, but it's still
helpful to have it read aloud sometimes.
And so, we should consider that not
all screen reader users are blind, or
even fully blind, some people use the
screen reader even though they can't see
the screen, they're low vision.
I think some of the techniques that
I had seen for screen readers,
just like, no one can ever see them,
skip links.
There's a skip link I just fixed
the other day that I'm like,
no one can see the skip link,
it's for screen readers users only.
And I think that's a misconception
that I hope to clear up that we should
make keyboard interfaces that
screen reader users can also use.
So I have a graphic here
of using Voiceover for Mac,
just navigating a photo website.
And so, we can see the image of the cat,
it's wrapped in a link, so
the screen reader will announce
what type of element we're on.
And if there is content inside of it,
it will tell us, so this is an image.
It was a stock photo of a cat, so it says,
free cat, feline, photo, and picture.
Maybe highlighting the alt text of
this could use a little bit of help,
I don't know why it says photo and
picture.
But I think sometimes capturing things how
they were created, seeing what it sounds
like in a screen reader can be really
helpful, cuz you get more context of like,
that's why I shouldn't write
the word photo in my alt text.
Cuz it already is an image, in this case,
I think they had photo, and picture,
and image, so we have to test
it sometimes and figure out,
well, what's gonna make
sense in that context?
So screen readers and how they work.
Screen readers are both software and
hardware.
A lot of software that help people
interact with the computer or
mobile device, they convert text and
graphics on the screen to speech or
even braille output.
So there's tactile refreshable
braille that people can use as well.
So it's like reading with your
fingertips instead of your eyes, and
that's pretty cool.
But that leverages some
of these same APIs and
a lot of the same accessibility
techniques that we'll learn about.
The iPhone, as I mentioned,
has an amazing screen reader built
in called VoiceOver for iOS.
Mac computers have
VoiceOver built in as well,
it is slightly different than the version
on iOS, just for platform reasons.
On Windows, users can take advantage
of the built-in screen reader narrator,
or you can install third-party
software like NVDA or JAWS.
Like NVDA it's free and open source, and
I have a virtual machine on my computer
that I can run testing on my Mac.
So when users turn on the device,
the screen reader will take the input
using the platform applications, so
things like the settings app, you could
read that aloud in your screen reader.
You could have it read out the web
browser, or YouTube on your iPhone, or
whatever application,
this isn't limited to the web.
It's kind of intuitive when
you think about it, but
just kind of getting to the basics here.
And so, it'll render that output aloud,
or using the tactile device,
if a user has one.
And it is pretty amazing that
our technologies work that way.
I have some details in here, there's
a link to read more about screen readers.
There are some surveys from a group called
WebAIM, it's Web Accessibility In Mind.
And do I have that link in here?
I'm sure there's a link in here somewhere,
but I'll show it to you just in case.
So WebAIM is a group from Utah,
and they're amazing.
They put out these surveys every
couple of years about how people
report voluntarily using different
screen readers and browsers.
And this is sort of our gold standard in
terms of what we can reference for data.
Because I mentioned we don't track screen
reader users for privacy reasons, but
we do have the survey results
that are shared widely,
every time they open up the survey for
participants.
It is a little bit biased and
that it's heavy on North America for
who's contributing to the survey,
it's kind of technology professionals,
mostly, but it's still something.
It's really helpful to have.
So if we scroll down here, we can see
they include mobile screen readers,
screen reader, and browser combinations.
So if you're on Windows,
I mentioned analytics a little bit,
which we can't track screen readers
directly, but we can put analytics on our
sites to see which browsers and
platforms people are on.
So say you have a heavy
Window's user base, JAWS and
NVDA are the leading screen readers for,
looks like Chrome on Windows.
And so you can learn details about how
people actually use these combinations
on here, and that can help you
narrow down what you're gonna test.
We can't test everything,
like I'm not gonna go fire up
every single screen reader.
I'm gonna have to prioritize, and
sometimes you don't have the bandwidth to
test as much as you would like,
but that's why we use standards.
And why we try to get the basics in, so it
will work reasonably well in most places.
And then if we have a blocking issue or
something,
some unique combination that our customers
are telling us is really important,
we can respond to that particular
feedback and make improvements.
So a big piece of how this works,
depending on what platform you're on.
So I mentioned Windows,
and iOS, and Android.
These platforms come with their
own accessibility APIs, and
this gets pretty geeky and I like it.
[LAUGH] So there is an awesome
link in here that I included,
it's kind of been archived and kept around
of how browsers work, it's fascinating.
Browsers are very
sophisticated applications,
they clean up a lot of our markup messes.
And so, browsers and our platform, so
MacOS in the case of my computer or
iOS or whatever platform you're on,
those APIs and
the browsers work together to
basically make our rendered webpages.
Like the accessibility information
that we get out of those is harnessed
using platform accessibility APIs.
And so, I mention these because there are
subtle differences in different platforms.
Like if you test a user interface and
a screen reader on iOS and
then you go test the same page,
it's a responsive page probably.
You go test that same one in NVDA,
and Chrome, on Windows,
it's not gonna be exactly the same.
So it's like the accessibility
version of pixel perfection.
There's going to be slight differences,
we have to embrace them.
Just know that those APIs are what's
gonna generate those changes,
it's not you, you're not losing your mind,
[LAUGH] they really are different,
even from MacOS to iOS, so
that's something to remember.
And an example here is
the Aria has pop-up state.
It is an attribute that you can
communicate a custom drop-down or
something.
It has pretty wildly different results
depending on what platform you're on,
and we have to work with that,
just something to be aware of.
So another piece of this,
part of what makes this all
work is the accessibility tree.
And this is a structure kind of parallel
to the DOM or the document object model.
This is what all of the accessibility
information on a page gets put into
its own tree, its own structure.
And screen readers and other assistive
technologies leverage that structure.
Some screen readers also look at the DOM,
like I know JAWS does on Windows.
Historically, they would
do that to try and
work around the lacking accessibility,
but the accessibility tree is a thing.
You will see it as we get into debugging,
and I am doing a workshop on enterprise
accessibility that will dive way
deeper into the accessibility tree.
So if you see that, you'll see it when we
debug as I mentioned, that's what that is.
So we did look at WebAIM,
how to prioritize, because there's so
many combinations,
you can't possibly test them all.
So work with your teams to identify
which browsers you need to test and
then reference WebAIM's screen reader
survey to know which screen readers
are the most popular combinations.
On a Mac,
VoiceOver works the best with Safari.
Safari is not usually
prioritized in most Mac
development environments
that I've ever worked in.
So it kind of ends up being
a special thing just to test so
that VoiceOver will work.
So maybe look at your site analytics, if
you have them to see if people are really
coming to the site and voiceover,
it will work with Chrome.
It just, you don't wanna spend your
time chasing down bugs in Chrome and
VoiceOver that work in Safari.
Talk about how you spend your time.
You have to make those judgment calls.
And if it takes a little bit of time to
get Safari, to fix some display bugs so
that it's not full of broken Windows, I
don't know if you know about broken Window
theory, but once there's a broken window,
people will just abandon it.
So if Safari looks junky,
no one's gonna use it,
but if we kind of keep up on it,
maybe it'll get used more and tested more.
Because you could save yourself some
time trying to, quote, fix things
in VoiceOver and Chrome when they just
work fine in Safari, that's a thing.
But Windows also,
if you have any site traffic on Windows,
which I mean, who doesn't?
I think a lot of developers like
I see all Macs in here [LAUGH].
But our customers and
users are probably visiting on Windows.
So we should have a process to
make sure that we're testing, and
using a virtual machine is great.
There's also a service called Assistive
Labs that you could check out to run
screen readers in the cloud, on platforms
that you don't necessarily use,
but I do think the VM or
virtual machine route is pretty great.
And I have some more links here
about how the browsers work,
my favorite Mozilla documentation for
various topics.
Yeah, so let's talk about how
to enable these screen readers.
So this page is full of cheat sheets and
things that you would want to reference
when you're in the act of testing.
Starting with VoiceOver for Mac, and this
is something I do all the time because I'm
not a daily screen reader user.
You can watch me try to
get better at it and
I reference these documents.
So this one is from Deque University,
VoiceOver Keyboard Shortcuts on a Mac.
I've even had this printer
version on my workstation, so
I could reference it when I'm
doing a lot of testing, but
it is totally understood that you
will have to brush up on these.
So VoiceOver, kind of 10,000 foot view,
it uses combinations of keys,
starting with the VoiceOver key,
which they say VO, but
it's actually control and
option held together.
So those modifier keys, you combine
them with a bunch of other keys,
that's a lot of commands to remember.
So cheat sheet, you can cheat,
you can reference, I do everyone does.
I'd rather have to look it up and know
what I'm doing than open JIRA issues or
something when it's just operator error,
that's a big part of getting
into accessibility testing.
Sometimes the testers, they're doing
their best, they care, they just,
if you're not a daily screen reader user
something might not even be an issue, or
maybe it is an issue and you missed it.
So there's a bit of a learning
curve here that is expected.
So I'd bookmark that one.
There's also similar cheat sheets for
iOS cuz iOS is definitely
a platform you should be testing
if you have any mobile traffic.
It's pretty limited to Safari on iOS,
like Apple and WebKit have notoriously
locked down the browser engine, so you
don't have too much that you have to test.
Like I wouldn't test mobile Chrome or
anything cuz it's the same.
But VoiceOver and Safari on iOS,
if you have any mobile traffic,
definitely worth the trying
cuz it is a little different.
So, and then similarly for Windows,
we have some details on JAWS and
NVDA, they work slightly differently.
And so, with VoiceOver,
that 10,000-foot view,
it's like jumbles of keys,
as I affectionately like to say.
It's a lot of combinations of keys,
whereas with NVDA and JAWS,
they work very similarly.
There is a totally different
paradigm that you don't have to
hold as many keys just
because of the way it works.
And this is something we'll get into
an enterprise accessibility workshop
quite a bit.
The sort of a gist of it is
that there are different modes,
that depending on what type of element
you're on, whether it's a form control or
a paragraph,
will change what key commands do what.
And so it's pretty, it's a little
bit simpler sometimes to use,
you just turn it on and
tab around navigate.
We are going to try using
VoiceOver as a bit of a demo.
We could fire up NVDA, I do have it,
we'll see if time allows, but
just be aware that it's not gonna work
exactly the same as VoiceOver does.
And then Android, so Android,
their screen reader historically has been
called TalkBack I think they're just
calling it Android accessibility now.
It's used by so many people,
these devices are so
popular that,
of course there's people that use it,
t's not as well-loved,
not as well-tested, I will say.
It's probably the one that gets,
like if iOS accessibility gets missed,
Android accessibility is definitely
going to get missed [LAUGH].
But if you have any Android users,
it is worth checking out.
I included some tips for
testing with Android from Google.
There's also a cheat sheet for
using the TalkBack screen reader.
And there's some mobile testing
tools that could be helpful,
there's ones from Deque and from events.
They're a startup.
So yeah, lots of different screen readers.